# Step 5: Python Specific

[< Prev](./p4.md) | [General Step Instructions](../step5.md) | [Next >](./p6.md)

---

[TOC]

## Summary

Organizing your code into page objects, or just abstracting a function out to a different file is not going to be *too* different from the coding we've done so far.

We did get a little ahead of ourselves abstracting the driver configuration out, but now we can just focus on our page object!
* Note, we *will* be removing the page navigation from our `conftest.py` since that really does belong in the page object.

**Important** old ways of running your tests may no longer work.
* See "some things to notice" under the "New Package" section.

## The Page Object

At its core, a page object is just an object we create that has the pieces of a page we need to interact with, and usually the methods we need to use. Generally you'll just pass in the `driver` object and get everything else back.

For us that would look something like:
1. Load the page
1. Get the title
1. Do a search
1. Get results

### New Package

Before, our file structure looked like this:

```
|Pipfile
|Pipfile.lock
|-tests
    | conftest.py
    | search.py
    | test_google.py
```

We need to add a new "package" for our our new page object classes -- we don't want to clutter up our `tests` folder like we have been, and honestly, that would only get worse as we expand the number of tests and supporting functionality.

We didn't make our `tests` folder a package, because that's actually how [the folks at pytest recommended we do it](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/explanation/goodpractices.html).

1. Add a folder named `pages` to the project's root directory.
1. Add an empty `__init__.py` file to the folder. 
    * This will be what lets python recognize the `pages` folder's contents as a package we can import from later.

Your new file structure should look like this:

```
|Pipfile
|Pipfile.lock
|-pages
|   | __init__.py
|-tests
    | conftest.py
    | search.py
    | test_google.py
```

#### Some things to notice

Some IDEs have a hard time parsing package structures, unless EVERY folder is a package. Trying to stick to the recommendations by the creators of pytest, we're not doing that.

You can go about some other methods to make sure that your environment recognizes all of your files/folders, but the easiest by far is to just run your tests this way:
* Navigate to your project's base directory.
* Use the command `python -m pytest tests`
    * If you are not in your virtual environment, you can use `pipenv python -m pytest tests` instead.

This will make sure that your Python interpretor knows where your project's base directory is (from the `-m` flag) and then pytest executes against the `tests` directory as normal.

**If done wrong** you will get `ImportError`s or `ModuleNotFoundError`s, because your tests won't be able to find the page classes.

### Creating a Page Object

Now we're ready to add our page object file.

1. In the `pages` folder, add a new file, `google.py`.
    * Arguably we should have a search page and a results page, since technically they *are* two different pages...
    * We'll save a bit of time here and just add one page, since we're more interested in utility than adding extra overhead. Decide for yourself when is best to split things up for clarity.
1. In this folder, declare a new class `GooglePage` with the required properties, constructor, and methods.
    * The constructor is always named ``__init__``, and takse `self` and whatever other arguments you want to pass.
        * I set it up to take `driver` and `wait` as arguments.
    * We will need to pass `self` to all of our class methods so they can access the properties of the class.

#### pages.google.py
```python
from selenium.webdriver.support import expected_conditions as EC
from selenium.webdriver.common.by import By

class GooglePage:
    # Here are the properties of the class to start.
    luckyButton = (By.NAME, "btnI")
    searchBar = (By.NAME, "q")
    searchButton = (By.XPATH, "(//*[@name='btnK'])[1]")
    results = (By.ID, "rso")
    url = 'https://www.google.com'
    def __init__(self, driver, wait):
        # When the Object is constructed, we'll add the driver and wait properties based on what we pass in.
        # That is what lets our page access the same driver as the rest of the test.
        self.driver = driver
        self.wait = wait

    # From our predefined functionality list:
    # 1. Load the page
    def getPage(self):
        self.driver.get(self.url)
        # I could add a wait here if I was worried about waiting for the page...
        # Implicit waits have worked just fine for Google though.

    # 2. Get the title
    def getTitle(self):
        return self.driver.title

    # 3. Do a search
    def search(self, searchTerm):
        # this really is just our search function copied in and simplified (we don't need to redefine waits)
        self.driver.find_element(*self.searchBar).send_keys(searchTerm)
        self.wait.until(EC.visibility_of_element_located(self.searchButton)).click()
        self.wait.until_not(EC.presence_of_element_located(self.searchButton))

    # 4 Get results
    def getResults(self):
        return self.driver.find_element(*self.results)
```

#### Some things to notice:
* If you're used to other languages, these locators/selectors might look a bit off.
    * `luckyButton = (By.NAME, "btnI")`
    * We still use them ALMOST the same.
        * `self.driver.find_element(*luckyButton)`
        * This would find it by using the `*` expansion operator, which makes it the same as if we'd typed `self.driver.find_element(By.NAME, "btnI")`.
        * We don't need to expand it for our expected conditions, since they expect those arguments to come wrapped up anyway.

### Refactoring For the Page Object

Now that we have a page object, we need to do a bit of refactoring.
* You **could** define your pages in your `conftest.py`, and if you use some consistently, that might be worth it.
* Otherwise, we need to import the pages we need and initialize them in each test, or in a fixture used by the tests.

#### Refactor conftest.py

1. We should remove our navigation from the fixture.
    * Remove: 
        ```python
        driver.get("https://www.google.com")
        ```
**conftest.py**
```python
import pytest
import selenium.webdriver
from selenium.webdriver.support.ui import WebDriverWait

@pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
def chrome_init(request):
    driver = selenium.webdriver.Chrome()
    driver.implicitly_wait(10)
    wait = WebDriverWait(driver, 10)
    request.cls.driver = driver
    request.cls.wait = wait
    yield
    driver.quit()
```

#### Refactor test_google.py
1. We need to import the page:
    ```python
    from pages.google import GooglePage
    ```
    * Our python interpreter knows that `pages` refers to the `pages` package we created, `.google` means the `google.py` file in that package, and we're importing the class `GooglePage` from that.
2. And set initialize the page for each test.
    ```python
    page = GooglePage(self.driver, self.wait)
    page.getPage()
    ```
3. We need to refactor our code to use the page object methods now instead of using the old search method, and a few other things.

This will actually leave us with the ONLY import we need in the test file being the page object! This can clean up our test's code to focus primarily on testing functionality instead of interacting with the UI directly.

**The result:**
```python
from pages.google import GooglePage


class TestGoogle:
    def test_google_title(self):
        page = GooglePage(self.driver, self.wait)
        page.getPage()
        assert "Google" in page.getTitle()
        # Notice, we just went ahead and found the element here using the loactor in our page object.
        # Normally I wouldn't do this in a test, I'd probably have a method on the page object to get it,
        # but it shows that it's possible.
        # Also, note the expansion operator, `*`, being used again.
        lucky_button = self.driver.find_element(*page.luckyButton)
        assert lucky_button.get_attribute("value") == "I'm Feeling Lucky"

    def test_google_search(self):
        page = GooglePage(self.driver, self.wait)
        page.getPage()
        page.search("Puppies")
        assert "Puppy" in page.getResults().text

```

#### Delete search.py

We don't need this separate file any more; and extra files can confuse other engineers who think we've kept them around for a reason. Maintain a clean file structure!

Our file tree:

```
|Pipfile
|Pipfile.lock
|-pages
|   | __init__.py
|   | google.py
|-tests
    | conftest.py
    | test_google.py
```

### Execute

Now run your tests again, using the `python -m pytest tests` command from your virtual environment at the project's base directory. You should see two tests passing, just as before!

* * *

## Tutorials/Docs

- [Unpacking Operators in Python (Towards Data Science)](https://towardsdatascience.com/unpacking-operators-in-python-306ae44cd480)
- [Develop Page Object Selenium Tests Using Python(Automation Panda/TestProject)](https://blog.testproject.io/2019/07/16/develop-page-object-selenium-tests-using-python)
- [Structuring Your Project (The Hitchhiker's Guide to Python)](https://docs.python-guide.org/writing/structure/)